I have two main kind of
concepts to share with you.
So one is a simple framework for
how to maintain stability, and
one is a whole section on culture and
how that impacts the work you're
doing on your design system.
So we'll start with the stability.
So I think originally I didn't even
think about this as something to sort of
investigate further, but I kept hearing
these stories that people were doing
really good systems work and
everything around them was changing.
[LAUGH] And
almost without any fault in their work,
they were feeling the repercussions
of everything around changing.
And I mean a lot of stuff, I think of
these now as destabilizing forces.
So things like the industry changing,
or the market changing, or
your leaders just all of a sudden
leaving and getting new ones in.
The structure of the hall or the tooling
your organization decides to support,
there's thousands of these things, right?
There's a handful, right?
All this stuff, it's just our
organizations are just in flux nonstop.
So, it's really hard, actually,
to create some internal tooling that can
withstand all of these destabilizing
forces happening around it.
And you combine that with the fact
that a system will not show
you value until it's been around for
a while, and
it's sort of ripe for
this destabilizing to win.
[LAUGH] If it can't survive a lot of
this stuff, it will never show value.
So I realized pretty early on after having
some of these conversations with folks,
there's got to be a way for
us to be more intentional about
creating stability for the system.
So I started asking a bunch of questions
in this and looking at organizations that
have done this well or survived a lot
of these kind of things happening.
And I identified three kind of
primary stabilizing forces.
The first is authority, the second is
value, and the third is tradition.
So as I mentioned earlier, a lot of
this stuff kind of is interrelated,
so you're gonna see some
concepts resurface here.
But let talk about this quickly.
So the authority stabilizing force
simply means that leadership is actively
supporting the system and their goals.
The design system team has confidence,
right, to carry out their work
knowing the leaders have their back.
And the key word here is active, actively.
So if you can't point to very specific
things that your leadership is doing,
that means you're not really benefiting
from that as a stabilizing force.
The kind of things that you can see in
design systems that have this stabilizer
are things like real budgets,
dedicated time, dedicated staff.
And beyond just encouragement from
leadership for the work to happen for
people to use it, there's actually
an encouragement on the part of people
with authority inside the organization for
subscriber teams to contribute
back in some capacity too.
So they see it as everybody's
job in some ways.
Value, which we've talked about
a bit already, it just simply means
the system is offering real value to
the folks who you want to use it.
So it actually helps them with their work,
it's something that makes them faster or
more consistent.
It solves real problems for
them instead of introducing new ones.
And the kinds of things that
you see in design systems that
have this stabilizer are rapid adoption,
right?
I've made something to people, it's
valuable to them, so they will use it.
There's a lot of feature requests,
these teams get more bug
reports than anybody else.
And that's weird thinking this
is a really valuable thing, but
it's because they're having more use.
And there's a sort of a default
willingness to help evolve
the system in some way.
And the third stabilizer is tradition.
This means the system has become
the way we build interfaces
inside an organization.
And really,
once the system has taken root,
there's a lot of stability
simply in its acceptance, right?
Change is hard, so
it's hard to get people to use it.
But once they use it, you can count
on the fact that if it's embedded,
it's got some tradition,
those roots will hold it in place.
A sign that you have this stabilizer
is when you hear folks from different
disciplines talk about the design system
as if it's a single source of truth.
That's a common phrase I hear when
tradition has kind of taken root.
Now, tradition is a little bit
different than the others, right?
It's really about having authority and
value over time.
It's something that you earn,
it's not a specific thing you do, right?
It's just having these others over time is
what gives you that concept of tradition.
And remember we're still asking people to
change how they work, so only after that
change has been made which is hard [LAUGH]
will you get this force of tradition.
I like to show them in this way
because I think about them kind of as
the legs of a tripod, right?
Having a single one of this means you
can kind of fall over in any direction,
any destabilizing forces,
you're gonna fall.
But having two means you can
only fall in two directions, so
I can receive some destabilizing
forces from a couple directions.
But the goal, of course, is to get all
three, and that means you're stable on
any surface in any situation, and that's
kind of what we're looking for, right?
So we've talked already,
and you're probably seeing similarities
here about top down and grass roots.
So the common top down origin
story is that it's likely in that
scenario that your first stabilizing
force is gonna be authority.
So you're gonna get authority kind of
easier out of the gate if you're top down.
And in that case, you've got to focus
primarily on evolving the system in a way
that makes it extremely valuable for
different subscribers.
And that moves you towards the center
of this Venn diagram by way of
the value stabilizer, and
only after you've proven that value can
you earn the tradition, stabilizer.
And the opposite is true.
If your system was initiated by
individual contributors, you're gonna
to earn that grassroots or you're
gonna earn that value easier, right?
That's gonna come to you a little easier,
and
it's likely that'll be your
first stabilizing force.
In that case, you've got to make
sure you're educating leadership,
engaging with leadership on
the value of the system regularly.
And you have to do so using their language
as we've kinda talked a little bit about.
And that moves you towards the center
of the Venn diagram by way of
the authority stabilizer.
Only after you've gathered support
from your leadership can you earn that
tradition stabilizer.
Now of course, it's not enough to earn
these things or to get these things,
there is also the possibility
of regression.
So earning one of them doesn't
mean that you're done with it.
If you, as an example,
slow the evolution of your system or
stop engaging with your subscribers, you
can lose the value stabilizer, and that
puts you up in this risky spot, right,
the overlap of authority and tradition.
That means that authority and tradition
are requiring individuals to use a system
that is not helpful in their work,
it's not valuable to them.
So this makes those individuals
feel like they're not trusted,
it's a really risky place to be.
And then here's a very specific example.
One of the first massive
design systems that my
organization worked on was for
a really large retailer.
Online and in-store, they had multiple
brands and you've probably shopped there.
It's a big organization, they hired
us originally to come and to do,
this was way back, to do a responsive
redesign of their product detail page.
That was probably about seven or
eight years ago that we did that work, and
it took us a year.
I've never worked for so
long on a single page, but
we spent an entire year working
just on their product detail page.
Because that's the decision point for
this organization for $4 billion or
something [LAUGH] every year, so
there's a huge risk to make changes here.
So we just did it slow and steady,
we did lots of iteration, lots of testing.
And we did really good work, we showed
massive improvements and it was a,
by all accounts,
a really fantastic project.
At the end of that engagement, they said,
this is great, we wanna continue,
can you take some of this work?
Can we use it in other parts of the flow?
Let's tackle category,
listing pages next or whatever.
And so we were like, yes, but
give us just a couple of weeks
to take a look at something.
So we spent a couple of weeks sort of
prototyping, moving some of the work
we had done on that single page experience
into a more systematic approach, so
it could be reused across other
parts of their e-comm site.
And we went back and we said, look,
we did a really rough
prototype of this in a week.
I think if we spent a month or two here,
we could actually take what we've done on
your product detail page, turn it into
the beginning of a nice system for you.
And that will enable us to do the rest
of this work a lot more quickly.
And so they said, that sounds great.
And at this time, I'm just interacting,
we're just working directly with
our contacts, right, the people
who own the product detail page.
So we spend a month or two doing that,
then we jump into this other work.
It works really well, we started getting
subscribers across the organization.
At the end of that year, we had 12
different groups throughout the company
that were using the system
in some capacity.
And I will never forget the day that
we got the call from them saying,
stop all work on the design
system immediately.
And I thought to myself, what the heck?
[LAUGH] We just did all this amazing
work for you and it's clearly working.
And at the time,
we were a smaller organization and
this was a large part of our revenue, it
was a scary call to get just to be honest.
And I look at what happened now, and
I understand it so much more clearly.
But apparently, what happened internally
there is that the amount of money they had
spent on this thing called
design system crossed some
threshold that bubbled it up in a
spreadsheet or report somewhere that some
leader saw this thing in a budget report
and said, what the heck is design system?
I never approved money for that.
And what happened in that very
situation is this, right?
We had built something with
a tremendous amount of value,
it was earning tradition, but
we had never gone up to leadership to say,
this is worth it, it worth the investment
for you to put money towards this.
So they just pulled the plug like that,
one phone call, done.
Now, [LAUGH] we knew how
valuable this stuff was, and so
did our partner inside the organization,
so we were really fortunate.
We sat down with them, and
they said, you know what?
We have great relationships with all
12 of these subscriber groups, so
let me go to them and just ask.
So the ask of those groups was,
okay, do you remember that project we
did with you where you use
the system last year, can you tell
me roughly how long would it have taken
you to do that without the system?
And so this is definitely finger in the
wind kind of guesstimate type stuff, but
we got back some numbers
from each of these groups,
we put all that stuff into
a spreadsheet to show the impact.
And what we learned is that for
every dollar they had invested so
far in the design system, they got
$3 back just in developer efficiency
just over the course of one year, right?
So clearly, it was like a no brainer for
them to continue to invest.
They took that up to that executive,
got the sign off, and
we worked with them for
another six years or something on that.
So that's the risk, right, those things.
That leader will cut you off in
a heartbeat if they don't understand
what's going on, and that's why it's
really risky to be in this space.
So, this model has helped me a lot, so
I think about it a little bit like this,
it's not super pretty.
But it really gives us
a way to think about and
just to be conscious of are we
actually creating stability, or
are we living in this sort of risky
right side of this stuff, okay?
And it's again, hearkening back
to the origin story, concept, and
just really making sure that we're
balancing the needs of individual
contributors with the goals
that your leaders have.
So one thing that you can do and
we don't necessarily have to
take time to do this now.
But it's actually helpful to sit down and
just sketch this out and
actually think through like,
what are the things that I can show that
demonstrate that we actually
have authority as a stabilizer?
So what are the things they've done for
me in the last two weeks?
What are the things they've done in
the last month that have shown support?
What are the things that I've heard from
subscribers that mean that we actually
are offering something valuable to them,
right?
By keeping track of some of that stuff and
just pausing every once in a while,
sketch that out and make sure that
you're not drifting into these risky
areas is actually really helpful for you.